>> Mathew DesLauriers: Okay, so
one thing I mentioned already for
you guys is if you're lost at any point
and you're feeling like you're falling
behind in the code, then open up the repo,
the workshop generative art repo, and you
go into the source folder and it's split
up into the different sections of today.
We're gonna be doing 2D, and
I've tried to piecewise split it up into
some of the different chunks of code
that we're gonna be working with.
Right now we're still on grid margin, and
we're eventually gonna be
working our way through those.
But that's just in case you're lost,
hopefully don't look too far ahead because
it should be a bit more of a surprise,
but we'll see.
So yeah, here we are.
We have a grid of circles,
pretty basic so far.
But already with this code
we can start to do some
tweaks to it to start to get
some more interesting results.
So for example, instead of doing 5 by 5,
we can do 20 by 20 and
all of a sudden it's a big black mass.
But if we reduce the size of each of
these circles after we set the count
to a higher number, we set the radius
of the circle, and that's this here.
Let's say we set it to 20 or
something like that, or even lower, 10.
You can even do lower like five pixels.
And then we can set the line width to
a smaller value as well, maybe 10 or 20.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: So if I'm using
a radius of 5, line width of 20,
I can start to see a lot more
of these cells here in the grid,
maybe use a higher grid count,
maybe as far as 40.
And then we can also start to
introduce a bit of randomness.
So one way of doing that is once we
have our grid cells, we can just
randomly take some of them out, and
we can do that with the filter function.
So after we create our grid, we create
a filter function that looks like this.
And the function is gonna say,
if Math.random is greater than five
return true,
if it's less than five return false.
And that's just gonna end up taking
away some of the grid cells at random.
So we're gonna be getting a little bit
closer to this idea of generative art and
this idea of randomness and
emergent systems and rule based systems.
And every time we run reload the page,
or every time we save our file,
we're gonna end up with
a different set of randomness.
And so Math.random is pretty basic,
it gives us back a value between zero and
one, where one is actually exclusive,
I don't think one ever appears.
But one sort of limitation of this if you
wanted to have a random number between 10
and 30 or something like that,
you have to create your own function.
And another limitation,
especially when you're working with,
whether it's generative art or
any creative project that's using code,
sometimes your randomness is
just a bit out of control.
And sometimes you'll have a really good
output and then you'll show the client and
the client will use a different, they'll
reload the page or something like that.
And the random numbers will be different,
and
it might not look like
the client wanted it to look.
So what you can actually do with random
numbers is you can have a deterministic
random so that every time we reload
the page it's that same set of randomness.
And to do that we´re gonna install, or
not install we've already installed,
we´re gonna bring in another utility here.
We're gonna bring in the random utility
from the same Canvas sketch detail.
So here we're gonna bring
in the random utility and
it looks like this,
canvas-sketch-util/random.
And this module you can look at the docs.
Again, it's a link here,
canvas-sketch-util, and you'll see this
module has a lot of different utilities
around pseudo-random number generation.
So if you're familiar with Math.random,
this is a super powered
version of that times 100.
And it includes, this function is
basically the equivalent of Math.random,
random.value, that gives you
number between zero and one.
But there's a lot of other things that
we're gonna be getting into here, like
range is a function where it gives you
back a value between this function here,
between minimum and maximum.
Range floor is really useful for
index values,
like an integer value between zero and
six, or something like that.
And so we're just gonna use,
instead of using Math.random
we're gonna use random.value.
And that's the same thing,
it's just using the random module instead.
And now because we're
using the random module,
we can set a deterministic seed
before we start using the module.
And that looks like this,
random.setSeed and
then you pass in any number you want here.
It can be one or ten,
it can be a string as well.
It's just some unique identifier for
this random number generator.
And so let's say I used 512 and
I just keep it at 512.
You end up with this
deterministic randomness so
that every time I reload the page it
will give me the same exact result.
So that's really useful for generative
art, but it's also really useful for
creative coding in general.
Like let's say you have
a web socket server, or
something where you're connecting physical
installation with a digital screen,
and they're both using randomness.
You want those random numbers to align.
And so you might wanna use a deterministic
seed where both the physical installation
and the screen, or maybe the multiple
screens, they all use the same seed so
that they're all producing the same string
of random numbers one after another.
And so that's randomness in a nutshell.
And we're gonna be getting into
some of these other functions.
Cuz a lot of the work that I do is just
really playing on random values and
Gaussian distributions and
stuff like that.
So you'll start to see the pattern
that I like to use this module a lot.